# ksuid

ksuid is a Go library that can generate and parse KSUIDs.

# What is a KSUID?

KSUID is for K-Sortable Unique IDentifier. It's a way to generate globally
unique IDs similar to RFC 4122 UUIDs, but contain a time component so they
can be "roughly" sorted by time of creation. The remainder of the KSUID is
randomly generated bytes.

# Why use KSUIDs?

Distributed systems often require unique IDs. There are numerous solutions
out there for doing this, so why KSUID?

## 1. Sortable by Timestamp

Unlike the more common choice of UUIDv4, KSUIDs contain a timestamp component
that allows them to be roughly sorted by generation time. This is obviously not
a strong guarantee as it depends on wall clocks, but is still incredibly useful
in practice.

## 2. No Coordination Required

Snowflake IDs[1] and derivatives require coordination, which significantly
increases the complexity of implementation and creates operations overhead.
While RFC 4122 UUIDv1s do have a time component, there aren't enough bytes of
randomness to provide strong protections against duplicate ID generation.

KSUIDs use 128-bits of psuedorandom data, which provides a 64-times larger
number space than the 122-bits in the well-accepted RFC 4122 UUIDv4 standard.
The additional timestamp component drives down the extremely rare chance of
duplication to the point of near physical infeasibility, even assuming extreme
clock skew (> 24-hours) that would cause other severe anomalies.

1. https://blog.twitter.com/2010/announcing-snowflake

## 3. Lexographically Sortable, Portable Representations

The binary and string representations are lexicographically sortable, which
allows them to be dropped into systems which do not natively support KSUIDs
and retain their k-sortable characteristics.

The string representation is that it is base62-encoded, so that they can "fit"
anywhere alphanumeric strings are accepted.

# How do they work?

KSUIDs are 20-bytes: a 32-bit unsigned integer UTC timestamp and a 128-bit
randomly generated payload. The timestamp uses big-endian encoding, to allow
lexicographic sorting. The timestamp epoch is adjusted to March 5th, 2014,
providing over 100 years of useful life starting at UNIX epoch + 14e8. The
payload uses a cryptographically-strong pseudorandom number generator.

The string representation is fixed at 27-characters encoded using a base62
encoding that also sorts lexicographically.

# Command Line Tool

This package comes with a simple command-line tool `ksuid`. This tool can
generate KSUIDs as well as inspect the internal components for debugging
purposes.
